---
layout: post
title: "What is std::ref?"
date: 2024-8-21
category: dev
tags: [cpp, cpp23, binarysizes, move_only_function]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Have you heard about `std::ref` and `std::cref`? The helper functions that generate objects of type `std::reference_wrapper`? The answer is probably yes. In that case, this article is probably not for you. But if you haven't heard about them, or the only usage of `std::reference_wrapper` you faced was storing references in a vector, then probably it's worth reading on.

This article is inspired by some failing tests that needed me to use `std::ref` in order to pass them.

What does `reference_wrapper` do?

A reference of an object `T` (`T&`) is not copy assignable. On the other hand, `std::reference_wrapper<T>` which emulates `T&` it both copy-constructible and copy-assignable. It's even trivially copyable, so copying can take place on a byte level which makes it very efficient.

So when should we use such a wrapper?

## Store references in a container

If you ever wanted to store references in a vector, you probably know that this wouldn't compile.

```cpp
// This doesn't compile
std::vector<std::string&> v;
```

Originally, the root cause was that a reference is not assignable. Once a reference is initialized, it cannot be modified to refer to another object. (Pointers can do that.) Therefore you cannot store `const` objects either, as they are not reassignable either.

```cpp
// This doesn't compile either
std::vector<const std::string> v;
```

While the above is still not possible, the rules changed a bit since C++11 and it's not mainly about copy assignability, but it's about (not) being erasable.

[Erasable means](https://stackoverflow.com/a/55301228) that the following expression is well formed:

```cpp
allocator_traits<A>::destroy(m, p)
```

Where `A` is the container's allocator type, `m` is an allocator instance and `p` is a pointer of type `*T`. [See here](https://eel.is/c++draft/container.requirements#def:Cpp17Erasable_from_X) for *Erasable* definition.

By default, `std::allocator<T>` is used as `vector`'s allocator. With the default allocator, the requirement is equivalent to the validity of `p->~T()` (Note that `T` is a reference type and `p` is pointer to a reference). However, a pointer to a reference is illegal, hence the expression is not well formed.

On the other hand, a pointer to an instance of `std::reference_wrapper` is valid and we can store references in a container like this:

```cpp
std::string s1{"Hello"};
std::string s2{","};
std::string s3{"World!"};
std::vector<std::reference_wrapper<std::string>> v {
  std::ref(s1), std::ref(s2), std::ref(s3)
};    
```

## Pass references to some standard template functions

But `std::ref` and `std::cref` doesn't only come in handy with containers. They are also very useful when you need to pass a reference to `std::bind`, to the constructor of `std::thread` or to some standard helper functions such as `std::make_pair`.

The common characteristic of them is that even if you pass references to them, they will remove those/decay those references and they will either move or copy what you passed in. Therefore if you really want to do as if you passed in a reference, use a reference wrapper!

Let's have a simple example of how `std::ref`/`std::cref` makes a difference in such scenarios!

```cpp
#include <functional>
#include <iostream>
 
void f(int& p1, int& p2, const int& p3) {
    std::cout << "In function: " << p1 << ' ' << p2 << ' ' << p3 << '\n';
    ++p1; // increments the copy of n1 stored in the function object
    ++p2; // increments the main()'s n2
    // ++p3; // compile error
}
 
int main() {
    int n1 = 1, n2 = 2, n3 = 3;
    std::function<void()> bound_f = std::bind(f, n1, std::ref(n2), std::cref(n3));
    n1 = 10;
    n2 = 11;
    n3 = 12;
    std::cout << "Before calling f() directly: " << n1 << ' ' << n2 << ' ' << n3 << '\n';
    f(n1, n2, n3);
    std::cout << "After calling f() directly: " << n1 << ' ' << n2 << ' ' << n3 << '\n';
    std::cout << "==================\n";
    std::cout << "Before calling bound_f(): " << n1 << ' ' << n2 << ' ' << n3 << '\n';
    bound_f();
    bound_f();
    std::cout << "After calling bound_f(): " << n1 << ' ' << n2 << ' ' << n3 << '\n';
}
```

In this example, `f()` takes all the integers by reference. The third one is also `const`. If we call `f()` directly, we get the desired behaviour, `n1` and `n2` are "permanently" modified.

On the other hand, the behaviour is different when we invoke `f()` with the help of `std::function`. When we don't use `std::ref` or `std::cref` to bind the arguments, they are simply copied. That's why even though `n1` is seemingly passed as a reference, in `bound_f`, `p1` still has the value it had when the binding was made. Likewise, it doesn't increase the value of `n1`. But if we call `bound_f()` the second time, we can see that `p1`'s value has changed. What that means is that `std::function` holds on a copy of `n1` and that is updated between the calls.

If we want `p1` to be an actual reference of `n1`, we must pass it with the help of `std::ref`, just as we did it for `n2`/`p2` and for `n3`/`p3`.

## Conclusion

`std::ref` and `std::cref` are helper functions to `std::reference_wrapper` objects. With the help of these constructs, you can store references in standard containers.

You can also pass references to templates and various helper functions such `std::bind`, `std::thread` or `std::make_pair`. Without using them, your code will seemingly work, but instead of taking references, copies might be made.

## Connect deeper

If you liked this article, please 
- hit on the like button,  
- [subscribe to my newsletter](http://eepurl.com/gvcv1j) 
- and let's connect on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/SandorDargo)!


